Performance Beyond One's Ability, Version 2 (as of 2021-05-15)
==============================================================

COPYRIGHT: github.com/enthor, 2021.

This document is hereby placed in the Public Domain. However, I advise
you to share this information only with close friends and trusted
allies. It would be most unfortunate if, for example, one's enemies
solved the problem of Mondays.


----------------------------------------------------------------------

PREFACE:

This is Version 2 of a document titled, "Performing Beyond One's
Abilities", dated Jan. 26, 2021 pdf.

"Mindfulness+Flow" is a practical mental technique for improving
performance, especially for tasks requiring problem-solving,
creativity and invention. It is not a Way. Also, humans have practiced
various mental disciplines for thousands of years and it is very
unlikely that "Mindfulness+Flow" is a new invention. My words are new,
that is all.

The name, "Mindfulness+Flow", was chosen for clarity with American
readers because the terms "Mindfulness" and "Flow" are in common use
and it is possible to convey some meaning using those words.

Some kinds of knowledge cannot be explained with words; for these
experience is required, and words are just signals, hints, or poetic
allusions to ineffable truths. I know that the technique described
here works because I use it. I can explain it for you but I cannot
understand it for you. If, after reading this document, you are
interested in pursuing the topic further it will be simple for you to
do research and read more, but practice and work will be required to
fully understand the benefits and limitations.


----------------------------------------------------------------------

DISCLAIMER:

This document is my own work and represents my own ideas, beliefs,
opinions and thoughts. It is intended to explain and systematize a
practical technique for improving performance, "Mindfulness+Flow".

I do not claim any credentials, expertise, training, warrants or
authority of any kind whatsoever.

The writing is based on my own experiences and is presented
empirically, without proof.

That said, I use this technique all the time. It works...for me.
Perhaps it will not work for you. Training, study and hard work are
required to improve performance, there are no shortcuts in that
regard. As always, TANSTAAFL: There ain't no such thing as a free
lunch.

Mindfulness+Flow is potentially hazardous to your physical and mental
health. Please use the information in this document with caution.

The author disclaims any and all responsibility for your actions.








----------------------------------------------------------------------

THE FOUR STEPS OF "MINDFULNESS+FLOW": ("FOUR STEPS COMMENTARY" below)

1. 	Form Intention Concerning Task Or Problem To Solve

	If ready, proceed to Step 2; else Step 4.

2. 	Relax Mind Using Non-Directed Mindfulness

	If ready, proceed to Step 3; else Step 4.

3. 	Enter Flow, Focusing Attention On Intended Task:

	LOOP: Proceed until one of the following happens ->

	3.1	If all tasks complete, proceed to Step 4.

	3.2	If time limit reached, proceed to Step 4.

	3.3 If confusion or sleepiness is experienced, proceed to Step 4.

	3.4	If work halted because new problem is encountered,

		3.4.1	Calmly remain in Flow and begin Directed Mindfulness,
		lightly focusing attention on new problem; Continue this and:

		3.4.2	Keeping new problem in the center of the Mind's Eye,
		slightly defocus attention (zoom out) so that the problem can
		be seen in the context of the original problem space; Continue
		this and:

		3.4.3	Allow the mind to roam, without volition or control,
		free-associating new hypotheses and answers without
		interference of the conscious mind, unhelpful emotions, or
		previously held opinions; Continue this and:

		3.4.4	Maintain Observer Status, waiting to be triggered by
		solution or good idea; Continue this and:

		3.4.5	Continue LOOP.


4. Stop and Reflect. Repeat Steps 1, 2 and 3 as needed.


----------------------------------------------------------------------

REFERENCE MATERIAL AND EXPLANATIONS:

(A) Mindfulness:

	https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mindfulness

	Commentary (don't blame Wikipedia!):

	(1) "Mindfulness" is very easy. Just relax the mind. Breathe
	fully: in and out. Inhale, then Exhale. Repeat. Allow thoughts to
	surface and pass by without judgement or volition, as if you are
	watching fish in an aquarium. To begin, you might try counting
	breaths and use a tiny bit of auto-suggestion: count backward from
	ten and believe that when one is reached your mind will be calm
	and peaceful. Breathe out your anxiety and stress. Breathe in
	peace and calmness. It is natural for your "inner monologue" to
	present thoughts and worries. Just allow them to float by, neither
	repressing nor following them.

	(2) If you are in great discomfort or full of adrenaline, it may
	be difficult to calm the mind. An entire day may be required to
	flush out the chemicals obstructing your calmness. Don't worry.
	Just do your best. It is good enough if you simply try. That is
	how to improve.

	(3) In some cases your inner monologue will be incessant. For
	example, if you are emotionally "torqued" about a past incident or
	an upcoming event. In this case it is okay to stop and make note
	of the situation. Acceptance is key. Admit that you are
	emotionally torqued and analyze the situation rationally and
	objectively. If there is a problem, try to fix it. If not, decide
	to worry about it tomorrow. Or just forget it. The good news is
	that your meditation brought something to your awareness and that
	you were able to stop the inner harangue and deal with it. This is
	a good thing: the meditation was halted but brought you
	information!

	(4) In time, given sufficient experience, you will be able to calm
	your mind instantly. It is not necessary to go deep into a
	meditative trance before entering Flow. In fact, a true master,
	like, say, Miyamoto Musashi, would be able to perform the entire
	Mindfulness+Flow technique and defeat his enemy instantaneously.
	(He would call it "The Void", I think.) It is also not necessary
	to sit in the Lotus position, or to close your eyes, or to feel
	"spiritual". Those are good things and you can do them if you
	like, but Mindfulness is a neurobiological state of mind, not
	mystical (I think...)

	(5) In Non-Directed Mindfulness you are not thinking about any
	specific thing. Your attention is zoomed out to Infinity so that
	you are aware of everything but focused on Nothing. That is what
	we use in Step 2.

	(6) Later, in Step 3.4, we calm the mind using Directed
	Mindfulness meditation and focus lightly on the new problem to be
	solved within the context of the original problem space. In this
	case we keep the problem centered in our Mind's Eye, but without
	pushing for a solution. Our attention is zoomed out part way, and
	we allow it to dwell on the center while our mind roams
	automatically and effortlessly over the whole space, looking up,
	down, inside and out, connecting dots and making associations.
	(It's a good deal for us: we get to relax and our mind has to do
	work!)

	(7) In both Directed and Non-Directed our conscious self maintains
	"Observer Status", watching and noting but not interfering
	consciously. This may require practice. Don't worry about it. Your
	Observer will wake you up if a good idea or solution is generated!
	You will feel excitement, satisfaction or happiness when this
	happens. Learn to recognize the signs. And believe me, your mind
	will be able to sort through all of the possibilities,
	combinations and permutations much, much faster if you are not
	consciously interfering and thinking about your feelings,
	emotions, opinions or what you want for lunch!

	(8) Also, remember that everything happens in the Now. When you
	are in Directed Mindfulness, your job is to lightly focus
	attention ONLY on the problem to be solved, not what happens
	later. Only the problem. Not what time it is, not your deadline,
	and not your belly. Time is an illusion. Space is illusion.
	Problem is real!


----------------------------------------------------------------------

(B) Flow:

	https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flow_(psychology)

	Commentary:

	(1) "Flow" may be more difficult to achieve than Mindfulness.
	Typically it would involve an activity one enjoys doing or
	thinking about and knows very well. And it would probably involve
	something desired very much -- an implacable, persistent desire
	that will not quit. Flow is something like a fascination, an
	ensorcelling or a rapture that transports the mind into another
	realm. Psychologists say it involves a loss of "reflective
	self-awareness" and sense of time. It is also reminiscent of
	Alfred Jarry's Pataphysics: "... pataphysics as an idea that 'the
	virtual or imaginary nature of things as glimpsed by the
	heightened vision of poetry or science or love can be seized and
	lived as real.'" (from the Wikipedia article).

	(2) Flow is also called "The Zone" -- as in "being in the Zone".
	Or, The Realm. Or the Void. To enter Flow, simply focus your
	Attention fully on your Intention. For example, while writing this
	document I am in the Zone, focusing my Attention 100% on writing
	this document because that is my Intention. It is my Intention
	because it is my Intention, because it is my Intention... the
	first cause does not exist while I am in the Zone. Self does not
	exist, time does not exist; only Doing Now exists.

	(3) As a practical matter for the beginner who is unfamiliar with
	the experience, Flow is recognized after it ends. Don't worry
	about being in it or not, just focus on the problem at hand!

	(4) One way to experience Flow is with a good book; something
	interesting and pleasant with likable characters. Begin reading
	slowly and think carefully about each sentence -- every word --
	and visualize everything that is happening in the story. If one
	can visualize the scenes (and not everyone does this), then as one
	is drawn into the story and the mind-pictures, the mind is
	transported into the story world; reflective self-awareness and
	sense of time disappear into Flow.

	(5) Flow can be dangerous, except perhaps for someone like a Zen
	Master, because the body may be ignored throughout the process. It
	may be very wise to set a timer for, say, 45 minutes, and then get
	up and walk around or do some calisthenics.

	(6) Flow may also be dangerously addictive. It can easily turn
	into what psychologists call Hyperfocus. Desire can become
	obsession. It is possible to fall into a trap that lasts for years
	or decades. A person might come to their senses and realize that a
	wrong path was taken -- and that there is no time left in life for
	a do-over. On the other hand, significant "real world" problems
	may require years of focused concentration and dawn-to-dusk labor.
	Nothing is free: if you want the ultimate you have to pay the
	ultimate price. TANSTAAFL.


----------------------------------------------------------------------

(C) "The Enchiridion" by Epictetus, translated by Elizabeth Carter:

	https://www.amazon.com/Enchiridion-Pocket-Epictetus/dp/153748222X

	or (free version):

		http://classics.mit.edu/Epictetus/epicench.html

	Commentary:

	(1) Stoic Logic and Philosophy seem quite relevant and useful for
	improved performance with Mindfulness+Flow. There are many things
	to ponder about what Epictetus teaches us. As you are likely
	aware, Humans are probably the greatest Under-Achievers in the
	Milky Way Galaxy. We also make a lot of mistakes and do stupid
	things constantly. Most of us are not very happy and often when we
	get what we thought we wanted we find that it just makes things
	worse. Improving performance, then, seems like a goal nearly
	everyone would be pursuing. But it appears that the exact opposite
	is true! We should think more about this.

	(2) Epictetus teaches in Chapter 1 that the only way to be happy
	is to be free; and to be free we must desire only those things
	within our control, and to be indifferent to things not in our
	control. Those things in our own (absolute) control are our own
	actions: our opinions, pursuits, desires and aversions. All of
	which derive from our own mind and thoughts. Things not in our
	control? Everything else. So, when we form an Intention and then
	go into The Flow to perform that task, it ought to concern only a
	thing within our own control (Chapter 19). Otherwise we will
	likely be frustrated. Or if we succeed sometimes, we will be
	taking pride in the acts of someone else and we will be unhappy
	other times. Failure to fulfill an intention can be quite damaging
	to one's psychology. So, as Epictetus teaches in Chapter 29, we
	should consider carefully before undertaking a Task.

	(3) Epictetus emphasizes over and over again the harm to self of
	faulty logic and belief in things which are not true. See
	especially Chapters 42, 44 and 45. This is very important to
	understand when solving problems because when we enter a Flow
	state, the only things we will find inside there are the things we
	brought with us. If we bring falsehoods and a habit of sloppy
	logic into the Flow, how can we generate valid solutions? We
	cannot. It would be better to know nothing and to know that than
	to think we know things which we do not. We should, as Epictetus
	points out, avoid categorical logic about things we cannot
	perfectly comprehend. Since the only absolute, unchanging,
	knowable truths pertain to abstractions such as mathematics and
	logic, we must be very careful about using the word "is" when
	talking about the real world. If we prejudge a "real world"
	situation and store that judgement as a "fact" in our brains, what
	correct facts can be derive from it at a later time? Especially
	since Reality is changing 10**43 times per second (according to
	physicists.)

	(4) Many of us have psychological obstructions that prevent us
	from progressing. For example, many people "hate math" or have
	anxiety about it. Learning new things seems to always involve some
	discomfort. Even now after so many years I often feel frustrated
	by my slowness in learning new things. And I compare myself to
	others and feel stupid or ashamed. See Chapters 33 and 48. These
	obstructions slow or halt our progress and impair performance. It
	is irrelevant that someone else might be able to solve a given
	problem faster. A quote from Thomas Edison about his light bulb
	experiments illustrates the point: "I have not failed, I’ve just
	found 10,000 ways in which it won’t work"
	(https://thebl.com/culture/lifes-great-teachers.html). Epictetus
	teaches us not to praise, blame, accuse or make comparisons to
	other people. Ever. None of those modes of thought will benefit us
	in the least while we are in The Flow solving a problem! They are
	irrelevant.


----------------------------------------------------------------------

(C)	"The Art of Writing" (or "Wen Fu"), by Lu Chi, translated by
Sam Hamill:

	https://www.amazon.com/Art-Writing-Lu-Chis-Wen/dp/1571314121

	Note: a translation which is free but perhaps not as highly
	recommended is

		http://web.mnstate.edu/gracyk/courses/web%20publishing/LuChi.
		htm

			"Lu Chi's Wen Fu

			The Art of Writing (circa A.D. 300)

			Based on a translation by Shih-Hsiang Chen, 1952, 
			modified after consulting a translation by Sam Hamill,
			1991.


	Commentary:

	(1) I cannot know precisely what Lu Chi meant since his words have
	been translated very differently by Sam Hamill and Theodore
	Gracyk. However, it appears from Sam Hamill's translation that Lu
	Chi was familiar with the steps of Mindfulness+Flow. Chapters 1,
	2, and 3 of the Wen Fu seem to correspond almost exactly to Steps
	1, 2 and 3 of Mindfulness+Flow. I wouldn't wish to insult his
	memory by stating that he invented it, and perhaps this is
	coincidental -- or a case of form following function. In any case,
	the fact that Lu Chi's work corresponds very well with the Four
	Steps of Mindfulness+Flow convinces me that the technique is
	valid, and not just my imagination or rationalization.

	(2) If you can afford it, buy a copy of Sam Hamill's translation.
	It is a nice little book that you will always be happy to have. I
	would like to include some excerpts from it here but I do not feel
	comfortable doing that since I imagine he wants to get paid.

----------------------------------------------------------------------


(D)	"A Book Of Five Rings", by Miyamoto Musashi (various
translations):

	https://www.amazon.com/Five-Rings-Miyamoto-Musashis-Strategy/dp/0785834001


	or,

	https://web.archive.org/web/20190125131917/http://www.bookoffiverings.com/


	Commentary:

	(1) Miyamoto Musashi is commonly acclaimed as the greatest
	swordsman in history. His work, "A Book of Five Rings" is as much
	about strategy as it is about fighting with swords:

		This is the Way for men who want to learn my strategy:

		Do not think dishonestly.

		The Way is in training.

		Become acquainted with every art.

		Know the Ways of professions.

		Distinguish between gain and loss in worldly matters.

		Develop intuitive judgement and understanding for everything.

		Perceive those things which cannot be seen.

		Pay attention even to trifles.

		Do nothing which is of no use.


	(2) Musashi's thinking is instructive for anyone wishing to solve
	problems. For example, he constantly admonishes the reader to
	think deeply about things and to look at them in various, perhaps
	unconventional ways. And this flexibility of thought always comes
	back to the essentials, stripping away useless convention and
	performative styling:

		"The true Way of sword fencing is the craft of defeating the
		enemy in a fight, and nothing other than this. If you attain
		and adhere to the wisdom of my strategy, you need never doubt
		that you will win."

	(3) The importance Musashi assigns to training is especially
	relevant for solving problems using Mindfulness+Flow. The more
	skills and facts that you know perfectly and can use without
	having to consciously think about them, the faster your mind will
	be able to solve problems while in the Flow. Your mind will be
	able to shuffle through thousands, or even millions of
	possibilities in an instant if you have perfect knowledge of all
	relevant facts. If not, things will go much slower!


----------------------------------------------------------------------

FOUR STEPS COMMENTARY

1. 	Form Intention Concerning Task Or Problem To Solve

	If ready, proceed to Step 2; else Step 4.

	--->Commentary:

		(1) This step involves research, study, training and actually
		forming an Intention of what to do. It is necessary to know
		things in order to be creative. However, thinking more
		broadly, it would be possible to use the Four Steps to perform
		the task of Studying -- or practically any task involving
		thought. Learning and retention of knowledge may be improved by
		studying while in Flow.

		(2) An Intention should be something which is under one's own
		control, as defined by Epictetus (see above.) And if a task is
		large, it may be wise to first break it down into smaller,
		more manageable sub-tasks; this is wise because it is possible
		to lose track of things during large projects, and often the
		person with the best task list performs best.

		(3) Behind an Intention is Will, the firmness of purpose and
		commitment. There should be no doubts or mental reservations
		about the task to be performed, or its necessity, desirability
		and timing. If you have doubts, pause and reflect. Often in life,
		timing is everything. Learn to trust yourself. Pay attention to
		the small, still voices advising caution.


2. 	Relax Mind Using Non-Directed Mindfulness

	If ready, proceed to Step 3; else Step 4.

	--->Commentary:

		(1) Mindfulness was described in detail above. Proceed when
		ready. Or pause and reflect. It may be that the portion of
		your mind devoted to "Observer Status" will register some
		information requiring action, but generally this step is just
		a brief pause before entering Flow.


3. 	Enter Flow, Focusing Attention On Intended Task:

	LOOP: Proceed until one of the following happens ->

	3.1	If all tasks complete, proceed to Step 4.

	3.2	If time limit reached, proceed to Step 4.

	--->Commentary:

		(1) set a timer on your phone to make sure that you get up and
		move your body every so often. Say, every 45 minutes. 

	3.3 If confusion or sleepiness is experienced, proceed to Step 4.

	--->Commentary:

		(1) In the case where confusion is felt, that may mean that
		the mental model is too incomplete, or is faulty, or is
		incompatible with the problem to be solved. Go back to the
		real world and try to explain the problem differently. Perhaps
		the problem is really two different problems, or it is not
		well defined. Break it down into simpler words! Draw a
		diagram. Or, try to explain it to someone else. Go for a long
		walk.

		(2) In the case of sleepiness, a likely cause is failure to
		fully understand some word or concept in the subject matter or
		problem specification. Retreat to the "real" world and review
		matters. Think deeply and study them until there is perfect
		recall of the relevant facts and the fundamental definitions.


	3.4	If work halted because new problem is encountered,

		3.4.1	Calmly remain in Flow and begin Directed Mindfulness,
		lightly focusing attention on new problem; Continue this and:

		3.4.2	Keeping new problem in the center of the Mind's Eye,
		slightly defocus attention (zoom out) so that the problem can
		be seen in the context of the original problem space; Continue
		this and:

		3.4.3	Allow the mind to roam, without volition or control,
		free-associating new hypotheses and answers without
		interference by the conscious mind, unhelpful emotions, or
		previously held opinions; Continue this and:

		3.4.4	Maintain Observer Status, waiting to be triggered by
		solution or good idea; Continue this and:

		3.4.5	Continue LOOP.

		--->Commentary:

			(1) Step 3.4 is really the key part of Mindfulness+Flow,
			and it is where the "magic" happens. It is not clear to me
			if the magic is in simply allowing the brain to
			parallel-process all possible solutions during free
			association. An alternative but highly speculative
			explanation of why Mindfulness+Flow works is that it
			involves neural quantum computations involving infinite
			copies of you in nearby parallel universes. Recall that
			according to David Deutsch, inventor of Quantum
			Computational Networks, parallel universes interact (only)
			through quantum interference, and since our brains
			constantly generate electromagnetic waves, which are
			subject to quantum interference, we cannot yet rule out
			neural quantum computations as an hypothesis...and this
			could explain how it is possible to obtain absurdly great
			results from time to time!

			(2) I have used Mindfulness+Flow enough times during code
			debugging to know that it works very well when done
			properly, and not at all when done incorrectly. For
			example, if I become anxious to find a bug so that I can
			proceed to the next task, I've ruined everything! It is
			absolutely necessary to focus on the current task and to
			stay in The Now.

			(3) Sometimes a solution arrives very fast. And in some
			cases an answer may not arrive for days. For example, in
			documentation written by someone who already understands
			everything perfectly, the author may have omitted crucial
			information which a student -- who knows nothing -- will
			require. In this case it is necessary to research the
			foundational elements of the discussion in greater depth
			so that the reasons why things are the way they are may be
			deduced, or guessed using inductive thought (as Musashi
			says, "Perceive those things which cannot be seen.)

			(4) It is possible to calmly and gently scan a document
			(or code) while remaining in Mindfulness+Flow, and to try
			to allow your mind to spot something that needs work or
			research. Just scan up and down slowly without focusing
			too intently and see if your mind spots anything of
			interest.

			(5) It is important to stay calm and patient even if an
			answer does not materialize right away. You may need to
			pause momentarily, perhaps to register awareness of
			something your Observer Status picked up, a potential new
			problem. For example, your mind may register that a
			concept's meaning is unclear. Or your intuition may nudge
			you towards a problem area but not explicitly reveal what
			is wrong, just that something is not quite right.

			(6) Finally, stay happy. A problem is just another puzzle,
			and you can do it! Have faith in yourself, even if you
			have to repeat the Four Steps multiple times. If
			necessary, you can always stop and do more research or
			conduct an experiment to gather more information. Your
			personal experience will guide you in this matter, and you
			will be able to choose how to proceed. Never be afraid to
			just take everything apart and start over. It may be that
			your entire project needs to be redone from the beginning.
			That has happened to me several times, and I was always
			glad I made that choice because a) the do-over always
			proceeds much faster than expected, and b) lessons learned
			from the first attempt are worth the price paid!


4. Stop and Reflect. Repeat Steps 1, 2 and 3 as needed.

		--->Commentary:

		(1) Always test any solution derived from Mindfulness+Flow. It
		may be correct, or not! Or it might not be the optimal
		solution. Or it might be partly correct, requiring adjustments
		(that is very likely!) And there may be deeper, more profound
		Truths awaiting your discovery, so keep digging! You can do
		another Four Steps to perform this evaluation and see if any
		problems appear.

		(2) If you have been working on a project for a long time then
		your problem space in "The Zone" will not self-destruct when
		you stop. Each time you go back into the Flow it will be
		easier and faster than the previous time. So don't worry about
		slow beginnings, and don't be afraid of taking proper rest and
		exercise breaks. In fact, it is possible to keep the problem
		space and Flow running in the background while you go for a
		nice walk or take a nap. It's all good. Haste makes waste.
		Tired is Stupid.

		(3) It is wise to make some notes after doing work in the
		Flow. Keep track of what you accomplished and anything you
		learned or new ideas you had. Being in Flow is a little bit
		dreamy and sometimes a lot happens in a very short amount of
		time! You might end up doing an entire day's work in just one
		hour, and later you'll be very glad to have some written notes
		documenting those accomplishments. For example, if you return
		to the work after a few years, those notes which explain your
		train of thought or chain of logic may be invaluable -- and
		when you get promoted your successor will be happy to have
		them.


----------------------------------------------------------------------

THE END
