Project Credits:

Cat: "Pookey"

    (I'd upload her pic but I doubt that github wishes to be known as a
    repository of cat pictures...)


Metaphysics: David Deutsch

    "All of them agree with Everett’s original theory that generically,
    when an experiment is observed to have a particular result, all the
    other possible results also occur and are observed simultaneously by
    other instances of the same observer who exist in physical reality –
    whose multiplicity the various Everettian theories refer to by terms
    such as ‘multiverse’, ‘many universes’, ‘many histories’ or even
    ‘many minds’."

    --David Deutsch, The Clarendon Laboratory, University of Oxford,
    "The Logic of Experimental Tests, Particularly of Everettian Quantum
    Theory", June 2016


Music Videos:

    Jackson Browne - For a Dancer - Live @ The Santa Barbara Bowl - 2015
    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aaO0BMhma3c

    Queen - Under pressure - (Live at Wembley) - 1985
    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OVzvoPP6M50

	Rochelle & The Sidewinders - See Things Clear
    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y6PDLUUk6C0

    Sade - Nothing Can Come Between Us - Official - 1988
    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_oVI0GW-Xd4

    Santana - Why Can't We Live Together - Live In Santiago - 1992
    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QWvV5w_GfDQ


Novels: John le Carré and Martin Cruz Smith

    "There was only now, Goethe was right. There was no tomorrow because
    tomorrow was the excuse. There was now, or there was nowhere."

    ―-John le Carré, "The Russia House"

    "It doesn't matter how ridiculous a lie is if it is your only chance
    of escape. It doesn't matter how obvious the truth is if the truth
    is that you'll never escape."

    ―-Martin Cruz Smith, "Gorky Park"


Numbers: Douglas Adams

    "recipriversexcluson, a number whose existence can only be defined
    as being anything other than itself"

    "Recipriversexclusons now play a vital part in many branches of
    math, including statistics and accountancy and also form the basic
    equations used to engineer the Somebody Else's Problem field."

    --Douglas Adams, "Life, the Universe and Everything"


Pataphysics: Alfred Jarry

    "... pataphysics as an idea that 'the virtual or imaginary nature of
    things as glimpsed by the heightened vision of poetry or science or
    love can be seized and lived as real.'"

    Pataphysics, Wikipedia


Philosophy: Epictetus

    1. Some things are in our control and others not. Things in our
    control are opinion, pursuit, desire, aversion, and, in a word,
    whatever are our own actions. Things not in our control are body,
    property, reputation, command, and, in one word, whatever are not
    our own actions.

    The things in our control are by nature free, unrestrained,
    unhindered; but those not in our control are weak, slavish,
    restrained, belonging to others. Remember, then, that if you suppose
    that things which are slavish by nature are also free, and that what
    belongs to others is your own, then you will be hindered. You will
    lament, you will be disturbed, and you will find fault both with
    gods and men. But if you suppose that only to be your own which is
    your own, and what belongs to others such as it really is, then no
    one will ever compel you or restrain you. Further, you will find
    fault with no one or accuse no one. You will do nothing against your
    will. No one will hurt you, you will have no enemies, and you not be
    harmed.

    Aiming therefore at such great things, remember that you must not
    allow yourself to be carried, even with a slight tendency, towards
    the attainment of lesser things. Instead, you must entirely quit
    some things and for the present postpone the rest. But if you would
    both have these great things, along with power and riches, then you
    will not gain even the latter, because you aim at the former too:
    but you will absolutely fail of the former, by which alone happiness
    and freedom are achieved.

    Work, therefore to be able to say to every harsh appearance, "You
    are but an appearance, and not absolutely the thing you appear to
    be." And then examine it by those rules which you have, and first,
    and chiefly, by this: whether it concerns the things which are in
    our own control, or those which are not; and, if it concerns
    anything not in our control, be prepared to say that it is nothing
    to you.

    --Epictetus, The Enchiridion


Poetry: Lord Alfred Tennyson

    "Old age hath yet his honour and his toil;
    Death closes all: but something ere the end,
    Some work of noble note, may yet be done,
    Not unbecoming men that strove with Gods.
    The lights begin to twinkle from the rocks:
    The long day wanes: the slow moon climbs: the deep
    Moans round with many voices. Come, my friends,
    'T is not too late to seek a newer world.
    Push off, and sitting well in order smite
    The sounding furrows; for my purpose holds
    To sail beyond the sunset, and the baths
    Of all the western stars, until I die."

    - Lord Alfred Tennyson, "Ulysses"


Software: Apple, Bare Bones, Github, Python, Wolfram

    Numbers, by Apple Inc
    https://www.apple.com/numbers/

    BBEdit, by Bare Bones Software, Inc.
    https://www.barebones.com/products/bbedit/

    Github Desktop, Github, Inc.
    https://desktop.github.com

    Python 3, Python Software Foundation
    https://www.python.org

    Wolfram|Alpha Pro, by Wolfram LLC
    https://www.wolframalpha.com/pro/

